# Syntax and Semantics
These are both fundamental concepts in programming languages. They define how code is structured (syntax) and what that code means (semantics). 

## Syntax:

Syntax is all about the structure and rules that govern how you write code in a programming language. It's like the grammar of the language. If you violate syntax rules, your code won't even compile. Syntax varies greatly across the many programming languages to fullfill various language goals/requirements. 
  
  Some example of syntax, 

    int x = 5; C++
    x = 5      Python
    x := 5     Golang
    int x = 5; C#

Most programming languages syntax are defined to be a familiar feel for programmers. Seeing the 4 different programming languages above you can see a common trend for declaring integer data types both statically and dynamically. 


### Let's break them down with examples in Go:

Here's an easy example of Go code that follows proper syntax rules:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
    fmt.Println("Hello, World!")
}
```

In this code, the syntax includes rules like: 
- using curly braces `{}` to define blocks of code,
- using parentheses `()` for function parameters,
- or the `.` operator for accessing a modules function, and so on.

If you make a syntax error, such as forgetting to close a parenthesis, your code won't compile and you will get an error message. This is mostly helpful, but sometimes the error messages can be a little hard to understand. However, most syntax errors at least tell you what line they are on or close to which will hopefully point you in the right direction.

## Semantics:

Semantics, on the other hand, is about the meaning of your code. Even if your code follows all the syntax rules, it can still produce incorrect or unexpected results if the semantics are flawed. Trying to divide a number by zero, or add an integer to a string is syntactically correct but semantically will produce an error. 

Here's an easy example in Golang:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
    x := 5
    y := "5"
    result := x + y
    fmt.Println(result)
}
```

This code follows the syntax rules, but it has a semantic error. The variable `x` is an integer, and `y` is a string, so you can't add them together resulting in an error:

```
invalid operation: x + y (mismatched types int and string)
```

So, to fix the semantics, you would need to convert one of the variables to match the type of the other:

```go
package main

import "fmt"
import "strconv"

func main() {
	x := 5
	y := "5"

	integer_y, _ := strconv.Atoi(y)
	result := x + integer_y

	fmt.Println(result)
}

```

In this revised code, we use `strconv.Atoi` to convert the string `y` into an integer before adding it to `x`. This now has 'corrected' semantics. This is a pretty straightforward example, and easily correctable. The hardest errors to 

  NOTE: syntax is like the grammar of a programming language - it enforces the rules for how you must write code, while semantics is about the meaning of your code and whether it does what you intend it to do. Both syntax and semantics are crucial for writing reliable and functional software. You must first learn the syntax to write semantically correct code. You can't have good semantics without proper syntax usage. 
  
### Historically

1. **Traditional Perspective:** Historically, a semantic error has been seen as an error that only becomes apparent during runtime. By this definition, a type mismatch error in Go would not be considered a semantic error because it's caught during compilation.
2. **Modern Perspective:** In the context of statically-typed languages, the boundary between syntax and semantics starts to blur. When the compiler checks for type correctness, it's ensuring the "meaning" or "intent" of your code is coherent. A type mismatch error in Go can be viewed as a semantic error from this perspective because it's about the "meaning" of the code — you're trying to do something that doesn't make logical sense in the language's type system, even if the syntax itself is structured correctly.

## Syntax and Semantics In Depth

We will now look at the specific defining characteristics of syntax and semantics.

### Syntax: (examples)
    

#### Comments

 Comments are used to add explanations or notes within the code. They are not executed and are typically for human readers. In C-style languages, comments start with `//` for single-line comments and `/* ... */` for multi-line comments.

   ```csharp
   // This is a single-line comment

   /* 
      This is a multi-line comment
   */
   ```

#### Variables and Data Types

Syntax for declaring and initializing variables and specifying their data types.

   ```python
   int x = 5;     // Declaring an integer variable
   string name = "John";  // Declaring a string variable
   ```

#### Operators 

Syntax for mathematical and logical operations, such as `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `==`, `&&`, `||`, etc.

   ```java
   int result = 10 + 5;  // Addition operator
   bool isEqual = (x == y);  // Equality operator
   ```

#### Control Structures

Syntax for control flow, including conditional statements and loops.

   - If statement:

     ```javascript
     if (condition) {
         // Code to execute if the condition is true
     }
     ```

   - For loop:

     ```c
     for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
         // Code to execute in a loop
     }
     ```

   - switch statements
   - while loops
   - dowhile loops

#### Function or Method Definitions

Syntax for defining functions or methods, including parameter lists and return types.

   ```cpp
   int add(int a, int b) {
       return a + b;
   }
   ```

#### String Concatenation

Syntax for combining strings, which can vary between languages.

   ```python
   string fullName = firstName + " " + lastName;
   ```

#### Array or List Creation

Syntax for creating and initializing arrays or lists.

   ```java
   int[] numbers = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};  // Creating an integer array
   ```

#### Object Creation

Syntax for creating objects from classes or templates.

   ```c++
   MyClass obj = new MyClass();  // Creating an instance of a class
   ```

#### Error Handling

Syntax for handling exceptions or errors, typically with try-catch blocks.

   ```python
   try:
       ### Code that might throw an exception
   except Error as err:
       ### Code to run in event of error
   ```

#### Lambda Expressions

Syntax for defining anonymous functions or closures, which are often used in functional programming.

   ```python
   lamba x: x * x

   test = x(5)
   print(test)
   # output: 25
   ```

#### Attributes or Annotations

Some languages allow you to add attributes or annotations to elements like classes, methods, or variables. The syntax varies, but it's often enclosed in square brackets.

   ```python
	def func(params):
	  '''
	  define __doc__ string here to add annotations on function
	  '''
   ```

#### Grammar Rules: 
Syntax defines the set of rules that dictate how programs must be written in a language. These rules ensure that the code is structured correctly and can be parsed by the compiler or interpreter. For example, in many languages, statements must end with a semicolon.

#### Tokens: 
Programs are made up of tokens, which are the smallest units of syntax. Tokens can be keywords, identifiers, operators, literals, and punctuation marks. For example, in the statement int x = 42;, the tokens include int, x, =, 42, and ;.

#### Brackets and Delimiters:
Syntax also encompasses the use of brackets, parentheses, curly braces, and other delimiters to define code blocks and control the scope of variables and functions.

#### Indentation: 
Some languages, like Python, use indentation as a part of their syntax to represent code blocks. Proper indentation is crucial for code readability and to determine the scope of statements.

#### Case Sensitivity:
Many languages are case-sensitive, meaning that myVariable and myvariable are treated as distinct identifiers. this is by design so there is no overlap in references during runtime later on in the program. 


## Semantics
  

#### Meaning of Statements: 
Semantics defines the meaning of statements or expressions in a programming language. It describes what the code does when executed. For example, in x = x + 1;, the semantics dictate that x is incremented by 1.

#### Type System: 
Semantics also includes the type system, which specifies how data types are used and how they interact. A strong type system, like in C# or Java, enforces strict type rules, while a weak type system, like in JavaScript, allows more flexibility.

#### Scope and Lifetime: 
Semantics specify the scope and lifetime of variables and how they are stored and accessed in memory. For example, local variables have limited scope and lifetime, while global variables exist throughout the program's execution.

#### Function Semantics: 
This includes how functions or methods are defined, called, and return values. Semantics dictate the rules for passing arguments, returning values, and the behavior of functions.

#### Recursive Semantics 
Recursion Semantics: The behavior and consequences of recursion, such as how recursion works and how deep the recursion stack can go, are part of the language's semantics.
 
 ```python
 def factorial(n):
    if n == 0:
        return 1
    else:
        return n * factorial(n-1)
```

#### Concurrency Semantics: 
In languages that support concurrency, such as Go or Java, semantics define how multiple threads or processes interact, how they synchronize, and how data is shared or protected.

#### Error Handling: 
Semantics include how errors are handled in a language, whether through exceptions, return codes, or other mechanisms. How errors propagate and are caught is part of the language's semantics.

#### Memory Managements
How memory is allocated and deallocated, how references and pointers are handled, and how the garbage collector works are essential parts of memory management semantics.

Manual Memory Management: In languages like C and C++, the semantics are explicit about memory allocation and deallocation, involving malloc, free, new, and delete.

```C
int *x = (int *)malloc(sizeof(int));
free(x);
```

## Summary

Syntax is the rulebook, the grammar, and the structure of a programming language. It guides us in composing code that adheres to the language's specifications, encompassing everything from properly placed semicolons to balanced curly braces. Syntax errors are the first hurdle we face, preventing our code from even being compiled or interpreted.

On the other hand, semantics is the deeper layer of meaning, the essence of what our code does. It addresses questions like, "What happens when this code runs?" and "Is this the desired behavior?" Semantics involve type systems, data manipulation, control flow, and the intricacies of how different language constructs interact. Errors in semantics can lead to runtime issues, logical flaws, or simply code that doesn't do what we intended.

However the classification of `syntax` vs `semantics` can be a bit blurred on occassion and depends on the context. For languages with strong, static typing (like Go), and throws type errors at compilation, can be seen as semantic because they involve the meaning and correctness of operations. However, in more dynamically-typed languages where type checking might happen at runtime (e.g. Python), the distinction is clearer, and type errors are more squarely in the realm of runtime semantics. 

In your journey as a programmer, grasping the intricacies of syntax and semantics is crucial. Syntax forms the structural integrity of your code, while semantics provide the functionality and logic. Balancing these two aspects is the art of software development, and proficiency in both is what sets apart the seasoned coder from the novice.
